HELD
 
PURPOSE AND CONSEQUENCE OF  DOUBLE TAXA TION AVOIDANCE CONVENTION
The judicial consensus in India has been that section 90 is specifically intended to enable and empower the
Central Government to issue a notification for implementation of the terms of a double taxation avoidance
agreement. When that happens, the provisions of such an agreement, with respect to cases to which wher e
they apply , would operate even if inconsistent with the provisions of the Income-tax Act. If it was not the
intention of the Legislatur e to make a departur e from the general principle of chargeability to tax under
section 4 and the general principle of ascertainment of total income under section 5 of the Act, then there was
no purpose in making those sections "subject to the provisions of the Act". The very object of grafting the said
two sections with the said clause is to enable the Central Government to issue a notification under section 90
towar ds implementation of the terms of the DTAs which would automatically override the provisions of the
Income-tax Act in the matter of ascertainment of chargeability to income tax and ascertainment of total
income, to the extent of inconsistency with the terms of the DT AC. [Para 26]
The contention of the respondents, which weighed with the High Court, viz., that the impugned circular No.
789, is inconsistent with the provisions of the Act, is a total non sequitur . Circular No. 789 is a circular within
the meaning of section 90; therefore, it must have the legal consequences contemplated by sub-section (2) of
section 90. In other words, the circular shall prevail even if inconsistent with the provisions of Income-tax Act,
1961 insofar as assessees cover ed by the provisions of the DTAC are concerned. There was no merit in the
contention that the delegate of a legislative power cannot exercise the power of exemption in a fiscal statute.
[Paras 27 & 29]
Section 90 enables the Central Government to enter into a DTAC with the foreign Government. When the
requisite notification has been issued thereunder , the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 90 spring into
operation and an assessee who is cover ed by the provisions of the DTAC is entitled to seek benefits
thereunder , even if the pr ovisions of the DT AC ar e inconsistent with the pr ovisions of Act. [Para 30]
STARE DECISIS
As observed in Mishri Lal v. Dhirendra Nath [1999] 4 SCC 11 even if the High Courts have consistently taken
an erroneous view, it would be worthwhile to let the matter rest, since large number of parties have modulated
their legal r elationship based on this settled position of law . [Para 32]
VALIDITY  OF CIRCULAR NO. 789
While commenting adversely upon the validity of the impugned circular , the High Court said "that the circular
itself does not show that the same has been issued under section 119; only in a case wher e the circular is
issued under section 119, the same would be legally binding on the revenue. The circular does not deal with
the power of the ITO to consider the question as to whether although appar ently  a company is incorporated in
Mauritius but whether the company is also a resident of India and/or not a resident of Mauritius at all." It is
trite law that as long as an authority has power , which is traceable to a source, the mere fact that source of
power is not indicated in an instrument does not render the instrument invalid. As long as the circular
emanates from the CBDT  and contains orders, instructions or directions pertaining to proper administration
of the Act, it is relatable to the source of power under section 119 irrespective of its nomenclatur e. The High
Court was not justified in reading the circular as not complying with the provisions of section 119. The
circular falls well within the parameters of the powers exercisable by the CBDT  under section 119. [Paras 42
& 43]12/16/25, 12:11 PM
2/35
The only restriction on the power of the CBDT  is to prevent it from interfering with the course of assessment
of any particular assessee or the discr etion of the Commissioner of Income-T ax (Appeals). The Circular No.
789 does not in any way crib, cabin or confine the powers of the Assessing Officer with regard to any
particular assessment. It merely formulates broad guidelines to be applied in the matter of assessment of
assessees cover ed by the pr ovisions of the DT AC. [Paras 45 & 49]
The circular does not in any way takes away or curtail the jurisdiction of the Assessing Officer to assess the
income of the assessee befor e him. Therefore, it is erroneous to say that the impu gned Circular No. 789, dated
13-4-2000 is ultra vires the provisions of section 119. The powers conferr ed upon the CBDT  by sub-sections
(1) and (2) of Section 1 19 ar e wide enough to accommodate such a cir cular . [Para 50]
IS DT AC BAD FOR EXCESSIVE DELEGA TION
The question whether a particular delegated legislation is in excess of the power of the supporting legislation
conferr ed on the delegate, has to be determined with regard not only to specific provisions contained in the
relevant statute conferring the power to make rule or regulation, but also the object and purpose of the Act as
can be gather ed from the various provisions of the enactment. It would be wholly wrong for the Court to
substitute its own opinion as to what principle or policy would best serve the objects and purposes of the Act,
nor is it open to the Court to sit in judgment of the wisdom, the effectiveness or otherwise of the policy , so as
to declar e a regulation to be ultra vires merely on the ground that, in view of the Court, the impugned
provision will not help to carry thr ough the object and purposes of the Act. [Para 52]
Thus, it is not right to say that the impugned circular amounts to impermissible delegation of legislative
power . That the amendment made in section 90 was intended to empower the Government to enter into
agreement with foreign Government, if necessary , for relief from or avoidanc e of double taxation, is also
made clear by the Finance Minister in his Budget Speech, 1953-54.
IS THE DTAC BETWEEN INDIA  AND MAURITIUS ILLEGAL  & ULTRA  VIRES POWERS OF
CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  UNDER SECTION 90 ?
One cannot accept the contention of the respondents that the DTAC with Mauritius is ultra vires the powers of
the Central Government under section 90 on account of its susceptibility to 'treaty shopping' on behalf of the
residents of thir d countries.
There was no merit in the contention that avoidance of double taxation can arise only when tax is actually
paid in one of the Contracting States. [Para 96]
TREA TY SHOPPING - IS IT  ILLEGAL  ?
The respondents vehemently urged that the offshor e companies had been incorporated under the laws of
Mauritius only as Shell companies, which carry on no business therein, and were incorporated only with the
motive of taking undue advantage of the DTAC between India and Mauritius. They also urged that 'treaty
shopping' is both unethical and illegal and amounts to a fraud on the treaty and that instant Court must be
astute to inter dict all attempts at tr eaty shopping. [Para 102]
'Treaty shopping' is a graphic expression used to describe the act of a resident of a third country taking
advantage of a fiscal treaty between two Contracting States. The weighty recommendations of the Working
Group on Non-Resident Taxation are again about what the law ought to be, and a pointer to the Parliament
and the Executive for incorporating suitable limitation provisions in the treaty itself or by domestic
legislation. This per se  does not r ender an attempt by r esident of a thir d party to take advantage of the existing
provisions of the DT AC illegal. [Paras 103 & 1 14]
The recommendations of the Working Group of the JPC are intended for Parliament to take appropriate
action. The JPC might have noticed certain consequences, intended or uninte nded, flowing from the DTAC
and has made appropriate recommendations. Based on them, it is not possible  for the court to say that the
DTAC or the impugned circular are contrary to law, nor would it be possible to interfer e with either of them
on the basis of the r eport of the JPC. [Para 1 19]
The principles adopted in interpr etation of treaties are not the same as those in interpr etation of statutory
legislation. [Para 120]
The respondents strenuously criticized the act of incorporation by FIIs under the Mauritian Act as a 'sham'
and 'a device' actuated by improper motives. They contended that the Court should interdict such12/16/25, 12:11 PM
3/35
arrangements, and, as if by waving a magic wand, bring about a situation wher e the incorporation becomes
non est. For this they heavily rely on the judgment of the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in
McDowell & Co. Ltd. v. CTO [1985] 154 ITR 148/22 T axman 1 1. [Para 126]
RULE IN McDOWELL
Far from being exorcised in its country of origin, IRC v. Duke of Westminster [1936] AC 1 continues to be
alive and kicking in England. Inter estin gly, even in McDowell , though Chinnappa Reddy , J., dismisse d the
observation of J.C. Shah,J. in CIT v. A. Raman & Co. [1968] 67 ITR 11 (SC)  based on Duke of Westminster's
case ( supra ) and IRC v. Fisher's Executors [1926] AC 395, it does not appear that the rest of the Judges of
the Constitutional Bench contributed to this radical thinking. [Para 130]
The basic assumption made in the judgment of Chinnappa Reddy , J. in McDowell & Co. Ltd.'s case (supra )
that the principle in Duke of Westminster's case (supra ) has been departed from subsequently by the House of
Lords in England, is not corr ect. [Para 131]
One cannot agree with the view that Duke of Westminster's case (supra) is dead, or that its ghost has been
exorcised in England. The House of Lords does not seem to think so, the princ iple in Duke of Westminster's
case (supra) is very much alive and kicking in the country of its birth. And as far as India concerned, the
observations of Shah, J., in A. Raman & Co. (supra ) are very much r elevant even today . [Para 132]
One may usefully refer to the judgment of the Madras High Court in M.V.Valliappan v. CIT [1988] 170 ITR
238/ 37 Taxman 46which has rightly concluded that the decision in McDowell's Co. Ltd.'s case (supra)
cannot be read as laying down that every attempt at tax planning is illegitimate and must be ignor ed, or that
every transaction or arrangement which is perfectly permissible under law, which has the effect of reducing
the tax burden of the assessee, must be looked upon with disfavour . Though the Madras High Court had
occasion to refer to the judgment of the Privy Council in IRC v. Challenge Corpn. Ltd. [1987] 2 WLR 24, and
did not have the benefit of the House of Lords's pronouncement in Craven v. White [1988] 3 All ER 495, the
view taken by the Madras High Court appears to be corr ect. [Para 132]
Not only is the principle in Duke of Westminster's case (supra ) alive and kicking in England, but it also
seems to have acquir ed judicial benediction of the Constitutional Bench in India, notwithstanding the
temporary turbulence cr eated in the wake of McDowell & Co. Ltd.'s  case ( supra ). [Para 135]
In Waman Rao v. Union of India [1981] 2 SCC 362 and Minerva Mills Ltd. v. Union of India [1980] 3 SCC
625 the Court consider ed the import of the word "device' with reference to Article 31B which provides that the
Acts and Regulations specified in Ninth Schedule shall not be deemed to be void or even to have become void
on the ground that they are inconsistent with the Fundamental Rights. The use of the word 'device' was not
pejorative, but to describe a pr ovision of law intended to pr oduce a certain legal r esult. [Para 143]
If the Court finds that notwithstanding a series of legal steps taken by an assessee, the intended legal result
has not been achieved, the Court might be justified in overlooking the intermediate steps, but it would not be
permissible for the Court to treat the intervening legal steps as non est based upon some hypothetical
assessment of the 'real motive' of the assessee. The court must deal with what is tangible in an objective
manner and cannot affor d to chase a will-o'-the-wisp.
The judgment of the Privy Council in Bank of Chettinad Ltd. v. CIT [1940] 8 ITR 522 (PC) , wholeheartedly
approving the dicta in the passage from the opinion of Lord Russel in Duke of Westminster's case (supra),
was the law in India when the Constitution came into force. This was the law in force then, which continued
by reason of Article 372. Unless abrogated by an Act of Parliament, or by a clear pronouncement of the
Court, this legal principle would continue to hold good. Having anxiously scanned McDowell & Co. Ltd.'s
case (supra), one finds no reference therein to having dissented from or overruled the decision of the Privy
Council in Bank of Chettinad's case (supra). If any, the principle appears to have been reiterated with
approval by the Constitutional Bench of the Court in Mathuram Agrawal v. State of Madhya Pradesh [1999] 8
SCC 667. Thus, one cannot accept the contention of the respondents that there has been a very drastic change
in the fiscal jurisprudence, in India, as would entail a departur e. From Duke of Westminster's case (supra) to
Bank of Chettinad's case (supra) to Mathuram Agrawal's case (supra), despite the hiccups of McDowell , the
law has r emained the same. [Para 145]
One could not accept the submission that an act which is otherwise valid in law can be treated as non est
merely on the basis of some underlying motive supposedly resulting in some economic detriment or prejudice
to the national inter ests, as per ceived by the r espondents. [Para 146]12/16/25, 12:11 PM
4/35
In the result, the Delhi High Court erred on all counts in quashing the impugned circular . The judgment under
appeal was set aside and it was declar ed that the Circular No. 789, dated 13.4.2000 was valid and
efficacious. [Para 147]