HELD
 
■ Once a DTAA applies, the provisions of the Income-tax Act can only apply to the extent that they are
more beneficial to the assessee and not otherwise. Further , by Explanation 4 to section 90 of the Income-
tax Act it has been clarified by the Parliament that where any term is defined in a DTAA, the definition
contained in the DTAA is to be looked at. It is only where there is no such definition that the definition in
the Income-tax Act can then be applied. [Para 26]
The Copyright Act, 1957
■ The making of copies or adaptation of a computer programme in order to utilise the said computer
programme for the purpose for which it was supplied, or to make up back-u p copies as a temporary
protection against loss, destruction or damage so as to be able to utilise the computer programme for the
purpose for which it was supplied, does not constitute an act of infringement of copyright under section
52(1)( aa) of the Copyright Act. In short, what is referred to in section 52(1)( aa) would not amount to
reproduction so as to amount to an infringement of copyright.
■ Section 52(1)( ad) is independent of section 52(1)( aa) of the Copyright Act and states that the making of
copies of a computer programme from a personally legally obtained copy for non-commercial personal
use would not amount to an infringement of copyright. However , it is not possible to deduce from this
what is sought to be deduced by the Additional Solicitor General, namely , that if personally legally
obtained copies of a computer programme are to be exploited for commercial use, it would necessarily
amount to an infringement of copyright. Section 52(1)( ad) of the Copyright Act cannot be read to negate
the effect of section 52(1)( aa), since it deals with a subject matter that is separate and distinct from that
contained in section 52(1)( aa) of the Copyright Act. [Paras 38 & 39]
End-user licence agreements and distribution agreements
■ A reading of the distribution agreement between parties would show that what is granted to the distributor
is only a non-exclusive, non-transferable licence to resell computer software, it being expressly stipulated
that no copyright in the computer programme is transferred either to the distributor or to the ultimate end-
user. This is further amplified by stating that apart from a right to use the computer programme by the
end-user himself, there is no further right to sub-licence or transfer , nor is there any right to reverse-
engineer , modify , reproduce in any manner otherwise than permitted by the licence to the end-user . What
is paid by way of consideration, therefore, by the distributor in India to the foreign, no-resident
manufacturer or supplier , is the price of the computer programme as goods, either in a medium which
stores the software or in a medium by which software is embedded in hardware, which may be then
further resold by the distributor to the end-user in India, the distributor making a profit on such resale.
Importantly , the distributor does not get the right to use the product at all. [Para 45]
■ When it comes to an end-user who is directly sold the computer programme, such end-user can only use it
by installing it in the computer hardware owned by the end-user and cannot in any manner reproduce the
same for sale or transfer , contrary to the terms imposed by the EULA. [Para 46]
■ In all these cases, the 'licence' that is granted vide the EULA, is not a licence in terms of section 30 of the
Copyright Act, which transfers an interest in all or any of the rights contained in sections 14(a) and 14(b)
of the Copyright Act, but is a 'licence' which imposes restrictions or conditions for the use of computer
software. Thus, it cannot be said that any of the EULAs in question are referable to section 30 of the
Copyright Act, inasmuch as section 30 Copyright Act speaks of granting an interest in any of the rights
mentioned in sections 14(a) and 14(b) of the Copyright Act. The EULAs in all the appeals do not grant12/16/25, 11:56 AM
2/83
any such right or interest, least of all, a right or interest to reproduce the computer software. In point of
fact, such reproduction is expressly interdicted, and it is also expressly stated that no vestige of copyright
is at all transferred, either to the distributor or to the end-user . A simple illustration to explain the aforesaid
position will suffice. If an English publisher sells 2000 copies of a particular book to an Indian distributor ,
who then resells the same at a profit, no copyright in the aforesaid books is transferred to the Indian
distributor , either by way of licence or otherwise, inasmuch as the Indian distributor only makes a profit
on the sale of each book. Importantly , there is no right in the Indian distributor to reproduce the aforesaid
book and then sell copies of the same. On the other hand, if an English publisher were to sell the same
book to an Indian publisher , this time with the right to reproduce and make copies of the aforesaid book
with the permission of the author , it can be said that copyright in the book has been transferred by way of
licence or otherwise, and what the Indian publisher will pay for, is the right to reproduce the book, which
can then be characterised as royalty for the exclusive right to reproduce the book in the territory
mentioned by the licence. [Para 47]
■ What is 'licensed' by the foreign, non-resident supplier to the distributor and resold to the resident end-
user, or directly supplied to the resident end-user , is in fact the sale of a physical object which contains an
embedded computer programme, and is therefore, a sale of goods. [Para 52]
Definition of royalty in the DT AAs vis-a-vis the Income-tax Act
■ Firstly , it will be seen that when article 12 of the India-Singapore DTAA defines the term 'royalties' in
sub-article (3) thereof, it does so stating that such definition is exhaustive - it uses the expression 'means'.
Secondly , the term 'royalties' refers to payments of any kind that are received as a consideration for the
use of or the right to use any copyright in a literary work. As opposed to this, the definition contained in
Explanation  2 to section 9(1)( vi), of the Income-tax Act is wider in at least three respects:
i. It speaks of 'consideration', but also includes a lump-sum consideration which would not amount to
income of the recipient char geable under the head 'capital gains';
ii. When it speaks of the transfer of 'all or any rights', it expressly includes the granting of a licence in
respect thereof; and
iii. It states that such transfer must be 'in respect of' any copyright of any literary work. [Para 63]
■ However , even where such transfer is 'in respect of' copyright, the transfer of all or any rights in relation
to copyright is a sinequanon under Explanation  2 to section 9(1)( vi) of the Income-tax Act. In short, there
must be transfer by way of licence or otherwise, of all or any of the rights mentioned in section 14(b) with
section 14( a) of the Copyright Act. [Para 64]
Royalty under the Income-tax Act
■ Even if one were to consider the ambit of 'royalty' only under the Income-tax Act on the footing that none
of the DTAAs apply to the facts of these cases, the definition of royalty that is contained in Explanation  2
to section 9(1)( vi) of the Income-tax Act would make it clear that there has to be a transfer of 'all or any
rights' which includes the grant of a licence in respect of any copyright in a literary work. The expression
'including the granting of a licence' in clause (v) of Explanation 2 to section 9(1)( vi), of the Income-tax
Act would necessarily mean a licence in which transfer is made of an interest in rights 'in respect of'
copyright, namely , that there is a parting with an interest in any of the rights mentioned in section 14(b)
read with section 14(a) of the Copyright Act. To this extent, there will be no difference between the
position under the DT AA and Explanation 2  to section 9(1)( vi) of the Income-tax Act. [Para 73]
■ It is therefore difficult to accept argument that Explanation  4 does not expand the scope of the expression
'royalty' as contained in Explanation  2 to section 9(1)( vi) of the Income-tax Act [Para 76]
■ It is equally difficult to accept the Additional Solicitor General's submission that Explanation  4 to section
9(1)( vi) of the Income-tax Act is clarificatory of the position as it always stood, since 1-6-1976, for which
he strongly relied upon CBDT  Circula r No. 152, dated 27-11-1974. Quite obviously , such a circular
cannot apply as it would then be explanatory of a position that existed even before section 9(1)( vi) was
actually inserted in the Income-tax Act vide the Finance Act, 1976. Quite clearly , Explanation  4 cannot
apply to any right for the use of or the right to use computer software even before the term 'computer
software' was inserted in the statute. Likewise, even qua section 2(o) of the Copyright Act, the term12/16/25, 11:56 AM
3/83
'computer software' was introduced for the first time in the definition of a literar y work, and defined under
section 2(f fc) only in 1994 vide Act 38 of 1994 [Para 77]
■ Furthermore, it is equally ludicrous for the aforesaid amendment which also inserted Explanation  6 to
section 9(1)( vi), of the Income-tax Act to apply with effect from 1-6-1976, when technology relating to
transmission by a satellite, optic fibre or other similar technology , was only regulated by the Parliament
for the first time through the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995, much after 1976. For all
these reasons, it is clear that Explanation  4 to section 9(1)( vi) of the Income-tax Act is not clarificato ry of
the position as on 1-6-1976, but in fact, expands that position to include what  is stated therein, vide the
Finance Act, 2012. [Para 78]
Whether persons liable to deduct TDS under section 195 of the Income-tax Act can be held liable to deduct
such sums at a time when Explanation  4 was factually not on the statute book, all deductions liable to be
made and the assessment years in question being prior to the year 2012
■ This question is answered by two Latin maxims, lex non cogit ad impossibilia, i.e., the law does not
demand the impossible and impotentia excusat legem, i.e., when there is a disability that makes it
impossible to obey the law, the alleged disobedience of the law is excused. Recently , in the judgment in
Arjun Panditrao Khotkar  v. Kailash Kushanrao Gorantyal  [Civil Appeal No. 20825 of 2017, dated 14-7-
2020], this Court applied the said maxims in the context of the requirement of a certificate to produce
evidence by way of electronic record under section 65B of the Evidence Act, 1872 and held that having
taken all possible steps to obtain the certificate and yet being unable to obtain it for reasons beyond his
control, the respondent in the fact of the case, was relieved of the mandatory obligation to furnish a
certificate. [Para 81]
■ It is thus clear that the 'person' mention ed in section 195 of the Income-tax Act cannot be expected to do
the impossible, namely , to apply the expanded definition of 'royalty' inserted by Explanation 4 to section
9(1)( vi), of the Income-tax Act for the assessm ent years in question, at a time when such Explanation  was
not actually and factually in the statute. [Para 85]
■ When, under a non-exclusive licence, an end-user gets the right to use computer software in the form of a
CD, the end-user only receives a right to use the software and nothing more. The end-user does not get
any of the rights that the owner contin ues to retain under section 14(b) of the Copyright Act read with
sub-section (a)(i)-(vii) thereof. Thus, the conclusion that when computer software is licensed for use
under an EULA, what is also licensed is the right to use the copyright embedded therein, is wholly
incorrect. The licence for the use of a product under an EULA  cannot be constr ued as the licence spoken
of in section 30 of the Copyright Act, as such EULA  only imposes restrictive conditions upon the end-user
and does not part with any interest relatable to any rights mentioned in sectio ns 14(a) and 14(b) of the
Copyright Act. [Para 97]
■ The conclusions that can be derived on a reading of the some judgments are as follows:
(i) Copyright is an exclusive right, which is negative in nature, being a right to restrict others from
doing certain acts.
(ii) Copyright is an intangible, incorporeal right, in the nature of a privilage, which is quite independent
of any material substance. Ownership of copyright in a work is different from the ownership of the
physical material in which the copyright ed work may happen to be embodied. An obvious example
is the purchaser of a book or a CD/DVD, who becomes the owner of the physical article, but does
not become the owner of the copyright inherent in the work, such copyright remaining exclusively
with the owner .
(iii) Parting with copyright entails parting with the right to do any of the acts mentio ned in section 14 of
the Copyright Act. The transfer of the material substance does not, of itself, serve to transfer the
copyright therein. The transfer of the ownership of the physical substance, in which copyright
subsists, gives the purchaser the right to do with it whatever he pleases, except the right to
reproduce the same and issue it to the public, unless such copies are already in circulation, and the
other acts mentioned in section 14 of the Copyright Act.
(iv) A licence from a copyright owner , conferring no proprietary interest on the licensee, does not entail
parting with any copyright, and is different from a licence issued under section 30 of the Copyright12/16/25, 11:56 AM
4/83
Act, which is a licence which grants the licensee an interest in the rights mentioned in section 14(a)
and 14(b) of the Copyright Act. Where the core of a transaction is to authorize the end-user to have
access to and make use of the 'licensed' computer software product over which the licensee has no
exclusive rights, no copyright is parted  with and consequently , no infringemen t takes place, as is
recognized by section 52(1)( aa) of the Copyright Act. It makes no difference whether the end-user
is enabled to use computer software that is customized to its specifications or otherwise.
(v) A non-exclusive, non-transferable licen ce, merely enabling the use of a copyri ghted product, is in
the nature of restrictive conditions which are ancillary to such use, and cannot be construed as a
licence to enjoy all or any of the enumerated rights mentioned in section 14 of the Copyright Act,
or created any interest in any such rights so as to attract section 30 of the Copyright Act.
(vi) The right to reproduce and the right to use computer software are distinct and separate rights, as has
been recognized in State Bank of India  v. Collector of Customs 2000 taxmann.com 1053 (SC) , the
former amounting to parting with copyright and the latter , in the context of non-exclusive EULAs,
not being so. [Para 1 17]
■ Consequently , the view contained in the determinations of the AAR in Dassault Systems, K.K., In re
[20210] 188 Taxman 223/322 ITR 125 (AAR – New Delhi) and Geoquest Systems B.V., In re [2010] 193
Taxman 81/327 ITR 1 (AAR - New Delhi)  and the judgments of the High Court of Delhi in DIT v.
Ericsson A.B., [2011] 16 taxmann.com 371/[2012] 204 Taxman 192/343 ITR 470, DIT v. Nokia Networks
OY [2012] 25 taxmann.com 225/[2013] 212 Taxman 68/358 ITR 259 (Delhi) DIT v. Infrasoft Ltd. [2013]
39 taxmann.com 38/[2014] 220 Taxman 273 (Delhi) CIT v. ZTE Corporation [2017] 77 taxmann.com
304/245 Taxman 252/392 ITR 80 (Delhi)  state the law correctly and have this Court's express approval.
[Para 1 18]
■ The language of section 14(b)(ii) of the Copyright Act makes it clear that it is the exclusive right of the
owner to sell or to give on commercial  rental or offer for sale or for commercial rental 'any copy of the
computer programme'. Thus, a distributor who purchases computer software in material form and resells it
to an end-user cannot be said to be within the scope of the aforesaid provision. The sale or commercial
rental spoken of in section 14(b)(ii) of the Copyright Act is of 'any copy of a computer programme',
making it clear that the section would only apply to the making of copies of the computer programme and
then selling them, i.e., reproduction of the same for sale or commercial rental. [Para 142]
Conclusion
■ Given the definition of royalties contained in article 12 of the DTAAs (between India and Singapore), it is
clear that there is no obligation on the persons mentioned in section 195 of the Income-tax Act to deduct
tax at source, as the distribution agreements/EULAs in the facts of these cases do not create any interest or
right in such distributors/end-users, which would amount to the use of or right to use any copyright. The
provisions contained in the Income-tax Act (section 9(1)( vi), along with Explanations  2 and 4 thereof),
which deal with royalty , not being more beneficial to the assessees, have no application in the facts of
these cases.
■ Thus, the amounts paid by resident Indian end-users/distributors to non-resident computer software
manufacturers/suppliers, as consideration for the resale/use of the computer software through
EULAs/distribution agreements, is not the payment of royalty for the use of copyright in the computer
software, and that the same does not give rise to any income taxable in India, as a result of which the
persons referred to in section 195 of the Income-tax Act were not liable to deduct any TDS under section
195 of the Income-tax Act. [Paras 168 & 169]