HELD
 
Under section 254, the Tribunal may after giving both the parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard,
pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit. The power  of the Tribunal in dealing with appeals is, thus, expressed
in the widest possible terms. The purpose of the assessment proceedings befor e the taxing authorities is to
assess correctly the tax liability of an assessee in accor dance with law. If, for example, as a result of a judicial
decision given while the appeal is pending befor e the Tribunal, it is found that a non-taxable item is taxed or
a permissible deduction is denied, there is no reason why the assessee should be prevented from raising that
question befor e the Tribunal for the first time, so long as the relevant facts are on record in respect of that
item. There is no reason to restrict the power  of the Tribunal under section 254 only to decide the grounds
which arise from the order of the Comm issioner (Appeals). Both the assessee as well as the Department have
a right to file an appeal/cr oss-objections befor e the Tribunal. There is no reason why the Tribunal should be
prevented fr om considering questions of law arising in assessment pr oceedings although not raised earlier .12/16/25, 2:50 PM
1/4
In the case of Jute Corpn. of India Ltd. v. CIT [1991] 187 ITR 688, the Court, while dealing with the powers
of the AAC observed that an appellate authority has all the powers  which the original authority may have in
deciding the question befor e it subject to the restrictions or limitations, if any, prescribed by the statutory
provisions. In the absence of any statutory provision, the appellate authority is vested with all the plenary
powers  which the subor dinate authority may have in the matter . There is no good reason to justify curtailment
of the power  of the AAC in entertaining an additional ground raised by the assessee in seeking modification of
the order of assessment passed by the ITO. The Court further observed that there may be several factors
justifying the raising of a new plea in an appeal and each case has to be consider ed on its own facts. The AAC
must be satisfied that the ground raised was bona fide and that the same could not have been raised earlier
for good reasons. The AAC should exercise his discr etion in permitting or not permitting the assessee to raise
an additional ground in accor dance with law and reason. The same observations would apply to appeals
befor e the T ribunal also.
The view that the Tribunal is confined only to issues arising out of the appeal befor e the Commissioner
(Appeals) takes too narrow a view of the powers  of the Tribunal. Undoubtedly , the Tribunal will have the
discr etion to allow or not allow a new ground to be raised. But wher e the Tribunal is only requir ed to
consider a question of law arising from the facts which are on record in the assessment proceedings there is
no reason why such a question should not be allowed to be raised when it is necessary to consider that
question in or der to corr ectly assess the tax liability of an assessee.
The Tribunal has, therefore, jurisdiction to examine a question of law which arises from the facts as found by
the authorities below and having a bearing on the tax liability of the assessee.
Proceedings remanded back to the Tribunal for consideration of the new grounds raised by the assessee on
the merits.