HELD
 
The orders for the assessment years 1960-61 and 1961-62 were made after hearing the authorised
representative of the assessee and since  the returns had been filed beyond time, the assessment proceedings
terminated in 'no demand'. As appar ently there was no taxable income, the losses were not directed to be set
off or carried forwar d by the ITO. Even if it was assumed for the sake of argument that the procedur e adopted
by the ITO in dealing with the 'loss returns' was not proper, the order of the ITO was not set aside in appeal
by the AAC and no further steps were taken by the assessee to question the order of the ITO. Those orders
had, in fact and in law, become final. Thus, by the order dated 12-12-1962, the assessment proceedings had
been concluded and with the dismissal of the appeals against that order, the order of the ITO dated 12-12-
1962 had acquir ed finality . The High Court clearly fell in error in holding that in the assessment proceedings
there had been no final determination of losses for the relevant year and in assuming as if the 'loss return' had
not been finally disposed of or was still open. The ITO had disposed of the assessment proceedings accepting
the plea of the assessee that for the relevant year it had no income and that is why the proceedings were filed
as 'No demand'. The order of assessment had, thus, become final on the concl usion of the proceedings and
dismissal of the appeal.
Further , to judge whether the assessee could claim set off, not granted in the original assessment proceedings,
by raising that plea once again in the reassessment proceedings under section 147, the assessing officer has
been vested with the power to 'assess or reassess' the escaped income of an assessee. The use of the
expression 'assess or reassess such income or recompute the loss or depreciat ion allowance' in section 147
after the conditions for reassessment are satisfied, is only relatable to the preceding expression in clauses (a)
and (b) viz., 'escaped assessment'. The term 'escaped assessment' includes both 'non-assessment' as well as
'under assessment'. Income is said to have 'escaped assessment' within the meaning of this section when it has
not been charged in the hands of an assessee in the relevant year of assessment. The expression 'assess' refers
to a situation wher e the assessment of the assessee for a particular year is, for the first time, made by
resorting to the provisions of section 147 because the assessment had not been made in the regular manner
under the Act. The expression 'reassess' refers to a situation wher e an assessment has already been made but
the ITO has, on the basis of information in his possession, reason to believ e that there has been under
assessment on account of the existence of any of the grounds contemplated by the provisions of section
147(b), read with the Explanation (I) thereto. The principle laid down by the Supreme Court in V.
Jaganmohan Rao v. CIT [1970] 75 ITR 373 (SC)  therefore, is only to the extent that once an assessment is
validly reopened by issuance of notice under section 34 of the 1922 Act (corr esponding to section 147 of the
1961 Act), the previous under -assessment is set aside and the ITO has the jurisdiction and duty to levy tax on
the entire income that had escaped assessment during the previous year. What is set aside is, thus, only the
previous under -assessment and not the original assessment proceedings. An order made in relation to the
escaped turnover does not affect the operative force of the original assessment, particularly if it has acquir ed
finality , and the original order retains both its character and identity . It is only in cases of 'under -assessment'
based on clauses (a ) to (d) of Explanation (I) to section 147, that the assessment of tax due has to be
recomputed on the entire taxable income. The judgment in Jaganmohan Rao's case (supra) therefore, cannot
be read to imply as laying down that in the reassessment proceedings validly initiated the assessee can seek
reopening of the whole assessment and claim credit in respect of items finally concluded in the original
assessment. The assessee cannot claim recomputation of the income or redoing of an assessment and be
allowed a claim which he either failed to make or which was otherwise rejected at the time of original
assessment, which has since acquir ed finality . Of course, in the reassessment proceedings it is open to an
assessee to show that the income alleged to have escaped assessment has in truth and in fact not escaped
assessment and that the same had been shown under some inappr opriate head in the original return, but to
read the judgment in V. Jaganmohan Rao's case (supra ) as if laying down that reassessment wipes out the
original assessment and that reassessment is not only confined to 'escaped assessment' or 'under -assessment'
but to the entire assessment for the year and start the assessment proceedings de novo giving right to an
assessee to reagitate matters which he had lost during the original assessment proceeding, which had
acquir ed finality , is not only erroneous but also against the phraseology of section 147 and the object of
reassessment proceedings. Such an interpr etation would be reading that judgment totally out of context in
which the questions ar ose for decision in that case.
It is neither desirable nor permissible to pick out a word or a sentence from the judgment of the Court,
divor ced from the context of the question under consideration and treat it to be the complete 'law' declar ed by12/16/25, 12:09 PM
2/16
the Court. The judgment must be read as a whole and the observations from the judgment have to be
consider ed in the light of the questions which were befor e the Court. A decision of the Court takes its colour
from the questions involved in the case in which it is render ed and while applying the decision to a latter case,
the Courts must carefully try to ascertain the true principle laid down by the decision of the Court and not to
pick out words or sentences from the judgment, divor ced from the context of the questions under consideration
by the Court, to support their pr oceedings.
Section 147, although part of a taxing statute, imposes no charge on the subject but deals merely with the
machinery of assessment and in interpr eting a provision of that kind, the rule is that construction should be
preferr ed which makes the machinery workable. Since the proceedings under section 147 are for the benefit of
the revenue and not an assessee and are aimed at gathering the 'escaped income' of an assessee, the same
cannot be allowed to be converted as 'revisional' or 'review' proceedings at the instance of the assessee,
thereby making the machinery unworkable.
Further , in proceedings under section 147 the ITO may bring to charge items of income which had escaped
assessment other than or in addition to that item or items, which have led to the issuance of notice under
section 148 and wher e reassessment is made under section 147 in respect of income which has escaped tax,
the ITO's jurisdiction is confined to only such income which has escaped tax or has been under -assessed and
does not extend to revising, reopening or reconsidering the whole assessment or permitting the assessee to
reagitate questions which have been decided in the original assessment proceedings. It is only the under -
assessment which is set aside and not the entire assessment when reassessment proceedings are initiated. The
ITO cannot make an order of reassessment inconsistent with the original order of assessment in respect of
matters which are not the subject-matter of proceedings under section 147. An assessee cannot resist validly
initiated reassessment proceedings unde r this section merely by showing that other income which had been
assessed originally was at too high a figur e except in cases under section 152(2).
The words 'such income' in section 147 clearly refer to the income which is chargeable to tax but has escaped
assessment and the ITO's jurisdiction under the section is confined only to such income which has escaped
assessment. It does not extend to reconsidering generally the concluded earlier assessment Claims which
have been disallowed in the original assessment proceeding cannot be perm itted to be reagitated on the
assessment being reopened for bringing to tax certain income which had escaped assessment because the
contr oversy on reassessment is confined to matters which are relevant only in respect of the income which had
not been brought to tax during the course of the original assessment. A matter not agitated in the concluded
original assessment proceedings also cannot be permitted to be agitated in the reassessment proceedings
unless relatable to the item sought to be taxed as 'escaped income'. Indeed, in the reassessment proceedings
for bringing to tax items which had escaped assessment, it would be open to an assessee to put forwar d claims
for deduction of any expenditur e in respect of that income or the non-taxability of the items at all. Keeping in
view the object and purpose of the proceedings under section 147 which are for the benefit of the revenue and
not an assessee, an assessee cannot be permitted to convert the reassessment proceedings on his appeal or
revision, in disguise, and seek relief in respect of items earlier rejected or claim relief in respect of items not
claimed in the original assessment proceedings, unless relatable to 'escaped income', and reagitate the
concluded matters. Even in cases wher e the claims of the assessee during  the course of reassessment
proceedings relating to the escaped assessment are accepted, still the allowance of such claims has to be
limited to the extent to which they reduce the income to that originally assessed . The income for purposes of
'reassessment' cannot be r educed beyond the income originally assessed.
In the instant case, the Tribunal rightly found that the loss which the assessee wanted to be set off against the
'escaped income' could not be allowed to be so set-off because in the original assessment proceedings no 'set
off was claimed or permitted and the original assessment had acquir ed finality when the appeal against the
order of assessment failed befor e the AAC and the assessee took no further steps to agitate the issue. The
Tribunal was also right in concluding that the items which the assessee wanted to be taken into account in the
proceedings under section 147 were unconnected with the escapement of incom e. The High Court clearly fell
in error in holding otherwise. Since the original assessment had been concluded finally against the assessee,
it was not permissible for the assessee in the reassessment proceedings to seek a review/r evision of the
concluded assessment for the purpose of computation of the escaped income. The High Court clearly fell in
error by permitting the assessee to reagitate, in the reassessment proceedings under section 147(a ) the
finally-concluded assessment proceedings and to grant to it relief in respect of items not only earlier rejected,
but also unconnected with the escapeme nt of income by assuming as if the original assessment had not been
concluded or was 'still open'.12/16/25, 12:09 PM
3/16
Therefore, in the reassessment proceedings, it was not open to the assessee to seek a review of the concluded
item, unconnected with the escapement of income, for the purpose of computation of the escaped income.
Decision of the High Court r eversed.
JUDICIAL  ANAL YSIS
 
The principle laid down by this Court in V. Jaganmohan Rao v. CIT/CEPT  [1970] 75 ITR 373 (SC) , is only to
the extent that once an assessment is validly reopened by issuance of notice under section 34 of the Indian
Income-tax Act, 1922 (corresponding to section 147 of the 1961 Act) the previous under -assessment is set
aside and the ITO has the jurisdiction and duty to levy tax on the entire income that had escaped assessment
during the previous year .
The judgment in V. Jaganmohan Rao's case (supra ), therefore, cannot be read to imply as laying down that in
the reassessment proceedings validly initiated the assessee can seek reopening of the whole assessment, and
claim credit in respect of items finally concluded in the original assessment.
It would be seen that whereas in the case of Anglo-Fr ench Textile Co. Ltd. v. CIT [1953] 23 ITR 82 (SC)  the
question as to the rights of an assessee to claim 'redoing', 'revising' or 'recomputing' entire income during the
reassessment proceedings was left open, that question did not come up for consideration in the case of Dy.
CCT v. H.R. Sri Ramulu [1977] 39 STC 177 (SC) or CST v. H.M. Esufali H.M. Abdulali [1973] 32 STC 77
(SC) or even in V. Jaganmohan Roa's case (supra ). Some of the High Courts, therefore, fell in error in reading
those judgments, divorced from the context in which the precise questions came up for consideration in those
cases, and to hold that the assessee could 'reagitate' the concluded issues and claim relief in respect of items,
finally concluded in the original assessm ent proceedings, during the reassessment proceedings, unconnected
with the escapement of income. We cannot, therefore, approve the broad propositions laid in that regard in Dy.
Commissioner v. Indian Refrigeration Industries (P.) Ltd. [1980] 46 STC 264 (Mad.), CIT v. Ramsevak Paul
[1977] 110 ITR 527 (Cal.) , CIT v. Assam Oil Co. Ltd. [1982] 133 ITR 204 /[1981] 6 Taxman 251 (Cal.) , CIT
v. Standar d Motor Products of India Ltd. [1983] 142 ITR 877 / 13 Taxman 269 (Mad.) , CIT v. Rangnath
Bangur [1984] 149 ITR 487 /[1985] 20 Taxman 72 (Raj.) , State Bank of Hyderabad v. CIT [1988] 171 ITR
232/[1987] 34 Taxman 515 (AP)  and CIT v. Indian Rare Earth Ltd. [1990] 181 ITR 22/ 48 Taxman 183
(Bom.) (TB)