HELD
 
■ In the approval, the Principal Chief Commissioner of Income-tax (PCCIT) states, "……Based on the
material available on record and carefu l consideration of the same, I am satisfied that it is a fit case to
issue notice under section 148. Hence, draft order submitted by the Assessi ng Officer under section
148A( d) is hereby approved". This is an incorrect statement made by the Principal Chief Commissioner
that the record has been carefully considered before granting of approval. This is because the record
would certainly have contained the notice issued under section 148A( d) and the information annexed to
that notice states escapement of income in the sum of Rs. 42, 858.47 crores, whereas the amount
mentioned in the order passed under section 148A( d) totals to Rs. 12431.99 crores. In the said order , there
is not even an explanation as to how the amount has changed or has gone down. In the affidavit in reply , it
is stated that in the notice the transaction value was taken gross and subsequently it was seen that there
were duplicate entries which were corre cted while passing the order . The notice issued does not contain
any duplicate entries. If there were duplicate entries, the Assessing Officer was duty bound to issue
clarification in the order and also give details of what were those duplicate entries. The AO should have
come clean on the error made. Therefore, if only the Principal Chief Commissioner or the other officers
had bothered to see the records and had really applied their mind to the same, these errors would not have
crept in. This displays total non-appli cation of mind by all those persons who have endorsed their
approval for issuance of notice under section 148. With great regret, it has to be mentioned that these
approvals are being granted mechanically and without application of mind and this is not the only matter .
The approval has been granted in a most casual manner . The power vested in the Authorities under section
151 to grant or not to grant approval to the Assessing Officer to reopen the assessment is coupled with a
duty. The Authorities were duty bound to apply their mind to the proposal put up for approval in the light
of material relied upon by the AO. That power cannot be exercised casually in a routine perfunctory
manner . The important safeguards provided in section 147 and 151 were treated lightly by the officers.
While recommending and granting approval, it was obligatory on the part of the officers to verify whether
there was any genuine material to suggest escapement of income. It was obligatory on all the Authorities
and Principal Chief Commissioner in particular to consider whether or not power to reopen is being
invoked properly . If only the Authorities  had read the record carefully , they would never have come to the
conclusion that this is a fit case for issuance of notice under section 148. They would have either told the
AO to correct the figures in column 7 or would have sent the papers back for reconsideration. These
officers have substituted the form for substance. [Para 4]
■ Therefore, the impugned order passed under section 148A( d) is quashed and set aside. The consequent
notice issued under section 148 also dated 19-4-2023 is also quashed and set aside. [Para 5]
PER COUR T
 
■ Innumerable orders passed under section 148A( d) are being set aside in view of the approval being
granted without application of mind. Officer should realize that this is also delaying
assessment/reassessment proceedings and is also af fecting the revenue of the nation.
J.D. Mistri , Sr. Adv. and Madhur  Agrawal  for the Petitioner . Devvrat Singh  for the Respondent.